---
layout: page
title:  "Customer Success ≠ Continuing Sales"
subtitle: "Otherwise why not just call it that?"
date:   2020-05-06 21:21:21 +0530
categories: ["Customer Success"]
---

Years ago, one of my colleagues moved to Tennessee and took to sending our California office random food products from his new state. The most memorable was a can of pork brains in milk, which fascinated everyone. We know what milk tastes like but pork brains? And how would the milk affect the pork brain texture? What texture did pork brains have to begin with?

We clearly needed one brave soul to cast their food fears aside so my manager offered $20 to anyone who ate a single (large) spoonful of canned pork brains in milk. A brave salesperson stepped up, grabbed a spoon, made eye contact with her scandalized coworkers, shrugged and said, “What? Salespeople are basically coin-operated.”

While a bit reductionist, her off-the-cuff statement rings true. But just because this is true and works during sales cycles, doesn’t mean it’s true and works during post-sales engagements. Once the contract is signed and everything shifts towards onboarding and implementation, coin-operated competitiveness is inimical to a successful initial and ongoing customer experience.

So why are so many customer success roles requiring sales work? On one hand, it makes sense for ongoing revenue growth through renewals and contract expansion on top of net new customers. Net retention is also an easy way to quantify customer success value. But customer success should not be focused on sales: they should focus on building relationships and *helping customers to be successful with your product*, whether through working out issues in the support queue, reviewing code and logs, providing training, advising on product usage, bringing viable customer feature requests to the product team, or providing the sales team with information to help close new deals or expansions.

My bold statement: If you organize your customer success team to be a watered down version of ongoing sales, you risk trading a long-term relationship with your customers for short-term quarterly financial gains that will disappear over time.

Here’s my shortlist of why I think this to be true:

* **Pre-contract and post-contract are different worlds.** The people signing the contract evaluate the product, the people using the product implement and get their hands dirty. Does a software developer care about funding rounds? Your customer logos? No. They want to understand the tools they need to use and get help fixing things if they break.
* **Success is about the customer, not internal sales goals.** If you ask customer success to focus on expansion or other sales duties, when the time comes to choose between prioritizing helping someone renew a contract and a recently renewed contract needing implementation assistance, which one will be prioritized? People know when they’re being sold to and it’s incredibly frustrating to need someone in your corner and instead get a sales pitch for a new product.
* **Trust and emotional sentiment matter massively.** Establishing trust with a new customer means understanding their systems and caring about their concerns/goals while demonstrating your trustworthiness by being a reliable source of product information and problem solving. It means knowing the usual new user issues and ensuring they don’t waste time on an unworkable approach. It means they know they can count on you to help and be honest with them.

* **Any successful human system at scale benefits from complementary contributions.** While at the extreme end of the spectrum, I think the stories of Challenger Explosion and Boeing 737 Max issues are solid examples of this in action. In both scenarios the technical concerns and alarms were pushed aside in favor of business concerns. While the stakes aren’t usually that high, the underlying dynamic that contributed to these disasters was the same: short-term business gains won out over technical expertise.

* **Customer Success is best when they know your product inside out.** Time spent diving through RFPs or hunting down contract-signers is time taken away from working with your product and maintaining practical expert knowledge. If you organize your customer success team to focus on renewals and expansion, you’re asking them to shift their focus away from being product experts.

Customer success is the grease upon which long-term customer retention and expansion rides. We are the familiar names helping you on support tickets, the dedicated champions bringing sales dreams to the realm of reality, your trusted advocate/advisor and, oftentimes, the emotional support humans providing comfort and reassurance if/when things go awry and helping get it back on track.

None of what I listed is readily quantifiable and therefore the value provided is a bit more abstract. I understand why so many companies fold customer success into sales: resolved tickets and net retention are concrete numbers. How do you accurately measure “The good feelings and relationships built this year meant our customers were understanding about an outage”? Or “Because of all the training we delivered, the customers never needed to file a support ticket to get unstuck”?

While we have CSAT and NPS scores, I think these never tell the full reality. Quantitative analysis certainly has its place but I would like to see more qualitative analysis that can accurately paint the efficacy of a given customer success team. Again, sales is easy as pie to measure on this front and I understand the slow slide into hybrid sales roles. So what could we measure against? Some thoughts I’ve had for standards are an ROB (reduction of burden) that calculates ongoing usage, support tickets alongside weighting the tickets for type of problem and sentiment analysis on the ticketing threads, and the amount of time/money saved for the support team. This is one loosely fleshed out idea but you can see where I’m going with this. We need expanded standards of measurement for customer success that go beyond a 1-10 rating question if we want to accurately assess value.

I hope more companies can see the value in long-term gains over quarterly wins and recognize the essential, distinct work done by customer success. We’re not salespeople, but we can make their work lives a breeze.   
